“Science is the belief in the ignorance of experts.”
  – Richard Feynman, *The Physics Teacher*, vol 7 no 6 (1969)

“We are well aware from the history of science that ideas
universally believed are not necessarily true.”
                    – Jane Jacobs, *The Economy of Cities*

“Problems in science are sometimes made easier by adding
complications.”  – Daniel Dennett, *Darwin’s Dangerous Idea*

“Science, done right, *is* one of the humanities.”
    – Daniel Dennett, quoting his anonymous, high
       school physics teacher in *Darwin’s Dangerous Idea*

“Is no one inspired by our present picture of the universe? This
value of science remains unsung by singers: you are reduced to
hearing not a song or poem, but an evening lecture about it. This
is not yet a scientific age.”
     – Richard Feynman, *What Do YOU Care What Other People Think*

“Science...is not just a matter of making mistakes, but of making
mistakes in public. Making mistakes for all to see, in the hopes
of getting the others to help with the corrections.”
                       – Daniel Dennett, *Darwin’s Dangerous Idea*

“Poverty always mingles myth with medicine, for myth is free
and science is dear.”            – Will Durant, *The Age of Faith*

“As soon as Maxwell’s predictions of invisible waves were
experimentally verified...in 1887, the major problems in physics
seemed to divide into two broad categories, namely, the physics
of matter and the physics of the aether.”
                 – Loyd S Swenson, *The Ethereal Aether*

“Great theories don’t simply appear in someone’s head as if by magic,
but take time to blossom. The so-called ‘eureka’ cry is more an
exclamation of mental relief than a cry of sudden revelation.”
          – Marcello Gleiser, *The Dancing Universe*

“If someone points out to you that your pet theory of the universe is
in disagreement with Maxwell’s equations—then so much the worse for
Maxwell’s equations. If it is found to be contradicted by observation
—well, these experimentalists do bungle things sometimes. But if your
theory is found to be against the second law of thermodynamics I can
give you no hope; there is nothing for it but to collapse in deepest
humiliation.”    – Arthur Eddington, *The Nature of the Physical World*

“Natural selection is an improbability pump.”
      – Richard Dawkins, *The Greatest Show on Earth*

“There is a big discrepancy between intuitive physics...and real
physics, which is just a bunch of differential equations.”
             – Steven Pinker, *The Stuff of Thought*

“It is sometimes humbling to think that the foundations of common
sense are just the design specs of one of our organs. Yet our science
and reason have managed to reveal many aspects of substance, space,
time, and causality that do violence to common sense but which we can
see are likely to be true.”   – Steven Pinker, *The Stuff of Thought*

“Somehow, the practice of astronomy, physics, chemistry or biology
normally fails to evoke the controversies over fundamentals that today
seem endemic among, say, psychologists or sociologists.”
  – Thomas Kuhn, *The Structure of Scientific Revolutions*

“The nature of the commitment to a law is very different from
that of commitment to a definition.”
  – Thomas Kuhn, *The Structure of Scientific Revolutions*

“After the student has done many problems, he may gain only added
facility by solving more. But at the start and for some time after,
doing problems is learning consequential things about nature.”
  – Thomas Kuhn, *The Structure of Scientific Revolutions*

“The science of Athens, what Einstein called the ancient dream
that pure thought can grasp reality, is then nothing else than
the exploration of our remotest past, ‘À la recherche du temps
perdu’ on a bolder scale than Proust ever imagined.”
    – Freeman Dyson, *Infinite in All Directions*

“The line between living and non-living at the beginning of evolution
is arbitrary, just as the line between human and non-human primates
at the end of evolution is arbitrary. In both cases, we are free to
draw the line according to our taste. In both cases, the task of
science is not to define the exaction position of the line, but to
understand how it came to be crossed.”
    – Freeman Dyson, *Infinite in All Directions*

“Life depends less on an abundant supply of energy than
on a good signal-to-noise ratio.”
    – Freeman Dyson, *Infinite in All Directions*

“Never sacrifice economies of speed [of implementation] to
achieve economies of scale [that is, of cost].”
       – Freeman Dyson, *Infinite in All Directions*

“I do not know whether we will actually have space butterflies
by the year 2010, but we shall have something equally new and
strange, if only we turn our backs on the past and keep our eyes
open for the opportunities which are beckoning us into the
twenty-first century.”
       – Freeman Dyson, *Infinite in All Directions* (1988)

“If physical theories were people, thermodynamics would be the village
witch. Over the course of three centuries, she smiled quietly as other
theories rose and withered, surviving major revolutions in physics,
like the advent of general relativity and quantum mechanics. The other
theories find her somewhat odd, somehow different in nature from the
rest, yet everyone comes to her for advice, and no-one dares to
contradict her.”
 – J Goold, et al., “The role of quantum information in thermodynamics”

“Oxytocin…has become one of the stars of the neuroscience show in
recent years because it has been found to grease the brain’s wheels of
attachment and trust. Historically, this was considered women’s stuff
and wasn’t taken very seriously.”  – Susan Pinker, *The Village Effect*

“Science should matter to us not only because it helps us to control
parts of the world, but also because it shows us things that we will
never master.”        – Alain de Botton, *Religion for Atheists*

“On one occasion Newton invited some friends to his chamber. As he
went to his study to fetch more wine, some thought came into his head.
So absorbed did he become that he completely forgot about the wine and
his friends waiting downstairs. Either his mind was indeed very far
away, or the company was extremely boring. Absentmindedness can be a
very useful skill.”             – Marcello Gleiser, *The Dancing Universe*

“Reevaluations of both the [Michelson-Morley] experiment and the
theory behind it continue into the specious present to reduce the
null result.”           – Loyd S Swenson, *The Ethereal Aether*

“Michelson Proves Einstein Theory....Ether-Drift is Confirmed.”
                         – *New York Times* headline, 9 January 1925

“The world is very complicated and it is clearly impossible for the
human mind to understand it completely. Man has therefore devised
an artifice which permits the complicated nature of the world to be
blamed on something which is called accidental, and thus permits
him to abstract a domain in which simple laws can be found.”
                    —Eugene P Wigner, *Symmetries and Reflections*

“The laws of nature are all conditional statements and they relate
only to a very small part of our knowledge of the world.”
              —Eugene P Wigner, “The Unreasonable  Effectiveness of
                                               Mathematics in the Natural Sciences”

“It is not at all natural that ‘laws of nature’ exist, much less that
man is able to discover them.”
     —Eugene P Wigner, “The Unreasonable Effectiveness of
                                      Mathematics in the Natural Sciences”

“It is...a miracle that in spite of the baffling complexity of the
world, certain regularities in the events could be discovered.”
          – Eugene P Wigner, paraphrasing Erwin Schrödinger in “The
Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences”

“Philosophy is the misuse of a terminology which was invented just for
this purpose.”
   – Eugene P Wigner, paraphrasing an anonymous writer  in “The
Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences”

“An expert is someone who knows some of the worst mistakes
that can be made in his subject and how to avoid them.”
                          – Werner Heisenberg, *Physics and Beyond*

“It is one of the most painful experiences of my entire scientific
life that I have...never succeeded in gaining universal recognition
for a new result, the truth of which I could demonstrate by a
conclusive, albeit only theoretical proof.”
        – Max Planck, “A Scientific Autobiography”, tr Frank Gaynor

“Everything that is relative presupposes the existence of something
that is absolute, and is meaningful only when juxtaposed to something
absolute.”    – Max Planck, “A Scientific Autobiography”, tr Frank Gaynor

“If a historian wanted to ascribe the decision of Julius Caesar to
cross the Rubicon not to his political deliberations and to his innate
temperament, but to free will, his view would be tantamount to a
renunciation of scientific understanding.”
      – Max Planck, “Phantom Problems in Science”, tr Frank Gaynor

“Where do you stop, once you’ve learned to drink from abstraction’s
heady cup?”  – Manil Suri, *The Big Bang of Numbers*

“What would happen if humans became extinct? Would exact triangles
also cease to exists if nobody was left to envision them?”
  – Manil Suri, *The Big Bang of Numbers*

“Modern humans live in a way unlike any other creature on earth....Our
way of living may be terribly unstable. We have been around for only a
tiny fraction of evolutionary time, and it is not at all clear that we
will survive as long as our *Homo erectus* ancestors, let alone the
150 million years that the dinosaurs were around.”
        – Keith Devlin, *The Math Gene*

"The creation myths of the various peoples and religions of
the world pale when compared to the glory of the big bang."
   – Liu Cixin, *The Three-Body Problem*, tr Ken Liu

"Anything sufficiently weird must be fishy."
   – Liu Cixin, *The Three-Body Problem*, tr Ken Liu

"This is amazing. How did you come into existence?"
  – Andrea Stocco, personal communication, 11 September 2025

“[Swammerdam’s] return from science to religion personified the
hesitation of modern man between a search for truth that smiles at
hope and a retreat to hopes that shy from truth.”
      – Will and Ariel Durant, *The Age of Louis XIV*

“The scientific legacy of the Middle Ages is modest indeed; yet it
includes the Hindu numerals, the decimal system, the conception of
experimental science, substantial contributions to mathematics,
geography, astronomy, and optics, the discovery of gunpowder, the
invention of eyeglasses, the mariner’s compass, the pendulum clock,
and—apparently the most indispensable of all—the distillation of
alcohol.”      – Will Durant, *The Age of Faith*

“When *Alice* was published and won [Queen Victoria’s] heart, she
graciously suggested that Mr. Dodgson dedicate his next book to her.
Unfortunately for Her Majesty, his next book was a mathematical opus
entitled *An Elementary Treatise on Determinants*.”
— Alexander Woollcott, introduction to *The Complete Works of Lewis Carroll*

“Mathematicians are machines for turning coffee into theorems.”
                                                  – Alfréd Rényi

“Anatomists today would be hard put to identify the brain of a visual
artist, a writer, or a mathematician—but they could recognize the
brain of a professional musician without a moment’s hesitation.”
                         – Oliver Sacks, *Musicophilia*

“The obvious mathematical breakthrough would be development of
an easy way to factor large prime numbers.”
    – Bill Gates, *The Road Ahead* (original 1995 hardcover edition)

“Science is a journey, but commerce turns it into a destination.
Science works by making mistakes and building off those mistakes to
make new mistakes and new discoveries. Commerce hates mistakes;
mistakes involve liability. A new miracle drug is found and heralded
and defended until it destroys enough lives to make it economically
inconvenient to those who created it.”
   – David Stuart MacLean, the *New York Times*, 7 August 2013

“The prevailing emphasis on mathematical and logical rigor has given
economics an internal consistency that is missing in other social
sciences. But there is little value in being consistently wrong.”
        – John Quiggin, *Zombie Economics*

“The scientific legacy of the Middle Ages is modest indeed; yet it
includes the Hindu numerals, the decimal system, the conception of
experimental science, substantial contributions to mathematics,
geography, astronomy, and optics, the discovery of gunpowder, the
invention of eyeglasses, the mariner’s compass, the pendulum clock,
and—apparently the most indispensable of all—the distillation of
alcohol.”      – Will Durant, *The Age of Faith*

‘[The] “clash” between science and religion...can be traced at least
as far back as ancient Babylon, where eclipses that had long been
attributed to restless and malignant supernatural beings were suddenly
found to occur at predictable intervals—predictable enough to make
you wonder whether restless and malignant supernatural beings were
really the problem.’          – Robert Wright, *The Evolution of God*

“Either half my colleagues are enormously stupid, or else the science
of Darwinism is fully compatible with conventional religious
beliefs.”           – Stephen Jay Gould, *Scientific American*, July 1992

“Science is everything we know how to explain to a computer,
and art is everything else.”        – Donald Knuth, during a lecture

“Medicine is a peculiar combination of science and fashion: half
penicillin, half shoulder pads.”                   – Ann Patchett


“Observed from without, the will is causally determined. Observed from
within, it is free.”
      – Max Planck, “Phantom Problems in Science”, tr Frank Gaynor

“The law of causality is neither true nor false. It is rather a
heuristic principle, a signpost...to help us find our bearings in a
bewildering maze of occurrences.”
 – Max Planck, “The Concept of Causality in Physics”, tr Frank Gaynor

“It is certainly no wonder that the discovery of...the least-action
principle...made its discoverer Leibnitz, and soon after him also his
follower Maupertuis, so boundlessly enthusiastic; for these scientists
believed themselves to have found in it a tangible evidence for a
ubiquitous higher reason ruling all nature.”
        – Max Planck, “Religion and Natural Science”, tr Frank Gaynor

“The greatest genius whom modern Italy gave to science, bowed down by
illness and infirmity, was obliged under threat of torture and prison
to ask God’s forgiveness for having led men to a better knowledge of
his works and for having taught them how to admire him in the
simplicity of the eternal laws by which he governs the universe.”
        – Condorcet, /Sketch for a Historical Picture of the Progress
             of the Human Mind/, tr June Barraclough

“Mathematics is the part of physics where experiments are cheap.”
      – Vladimir Arnold, “On teaching mathematics”, tr A V Goryunov

“The universe was full of ignorance all around and the scientist
panned through it like a prospector crouched over a mountain stream
looking for the gold of knowledge among the gravel of unreason, the
sand of uncertainty and the little whiskery eight-legged swimming
things of superstition.”      – Terry Pratchett, *Witches Abroad*

“It is wrong to think that the task of physics is to find out
how nature is. Physics concerns what we can say about
nature, nothing more.”         – Niels Bohr,
    quoted in Aage Peterson, *The Philosophy of Niels Bohr*

“There is no quantum world. There is only an abstract
quantum mechanical description.”     – Niels Bohr,
     quoted in Aage Peterson, *The Philosophy of Niels Bohr*

“A desk or table, a chair, paper and pencils. Oh yes, and a large
wastebasket, so I can throw away all my mistakes.”
— Albert Einstein, on being asked what he needed in his new office
    at the Institute for Advanced Study, quoted in Denis Brian,
    *Einstein: A Life*

“The actual difficulty lies in the fact that physics is a kind of
metaphysics. Physics describes reality; we know it only through
its physical description.”
    – Albert Einstein, letter to Erwin Schrödinger, 17 June 1935.

“I think I can safely say that nobody understands quantum
mechanics.”  – Richard Feynman, *The Character of Physical Law*

“There is no question that there is an unseen world. The problem
is how far is it from midtown and how late is it open?”
     – Woody Allen, quoted in Fred Alan Wolf, *Parallel Universes*

“There’s nothing amazing about size. Turtles are amazing...but the
fact that there’s a big turtle is far less amazing than the fact there
there is a turtle.”     – Terry Pratchett, *The Last Hero*

“Physics is a game played with nature, where we try to find out
what’s inside the box without being allowed to open it.”
          – Marcello Gleiser, *The Dancing Universe*

“Mysticism, if understood as the embodiment of our irresistible
attraction to the unknown, plays a fundamental role in the scientific
creative process of many physicists, past and present.”
          – Marcello Gleiser, *The Dancing Universe*

“The real constitution of things is accustomed to hide itself.”
         – Heraclitus, *On Nature*, tr R D Hicks

“There are several references in Bacon’s writing to nature as the
unruly female that must be conquered by reasoning, which he clearly
assumed to be a male characteristic. This unfortunate metaphor may
well have influenced the characterization of science as an exclusively
male enterpise, as well as the irrational exploitation of nature
during the Industrial Revolution, both of which survive to our days.”
          – Marcello Gleiser, *The Dancing Universe*


“Although order emerges locally, entropy increases globally. Disorder
always wins in the end. Sounds depressing? Well, think of the opposite
alternative; a world of constant entropy is a world with no change;
everything would either be static or perfectly cyclic, always coming
back precisely to the point it started, in endless perpetual motion.
This, I think, is a much more depressing alternative.”
          – Marcello Gleiser, *The Dancing Universe*

“It wasn’t a dark and stormy night. It should have been, but that’s
the weather for you. For every mad scientist who’s had a convenient
thunderstorm just on the night his Great Work is finished and lying
on the slab, there have been dozens who’ve sat around aimlessly under
the peaceful stars while Igor clocks up the overtime.”
      – Neil Gaiman and Terry Pratchett, *Good Omens*

“The anatomist presents to the eye the most hideous and
disagreeable objects; but his science is useful to the painter
in delineating even a Venus or an Helen.”
  – David Hume, *An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding*

“Gothic architecture was the supreme achievement of the medieval soul.
The men who dared to suspend those vaults on a few stilts of stone
studied and expressed their science with greater thoroughness and
effect than any medieval philosopher in any summa, and the lines and
harmonies of Notre Dame make a greater poem than The Divine Comedy.”
                – Will Durant, *The Age of Faith*

“Geography is only physics slowed down, with a few
trees stuck on it.”                – Terry Pratchett, *Jingo*

“Psychoanalysis is too poor a science to explain the case of Pessoa.”
        – Richard Zenith, *The Selected Prose of Fernando Pessoa*

“Every great advance in science has issued from a new audacity
of imagination.”         – John Dewey, *The Quest for Certainty*

“Animals that fly seem to violate the laws of physics, but
only until you learn a bit more about physics.”
            – Jonathan Haidt, *The Happiness Hypothesis*

“From the outset, philosophy, metaphysics have
circled mathematics like a frustrated hawk.”
        – George Steiner, *The Poetry of Thought*

“Dogs do not eat homework. A dog will throw up if it tries to
eat any type of homework, especially if it’s a science project”
    – Trevor Romain, *How to Do Homework Without Throwing Up*

“All metaphysics is a branch of the literature of fantasy.”
       – George Steiner, *The Poetry of Thought*
[Cribbing from Borges's "Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius", albeit
in a more definitive sense.]

“A handful of social and biological scientists over the last 50 years
have gradually forced informed people to give up some of the more
blatant of our biological errors. But there must be still other
countless errors of the same sort that no living man can yet detect,
because of the fog within which our type of Western culture envelopes
us.”  – Gunnar Myrdal, *An American Dilemma*

“Science advances primarily by replacement, not by addition.”
          – Stephen Jay Gould, *The Mismeasure of Man*

“Science, at bottom, is really anti-intellectual. It always distrusts
pure reason, and demands the production of objective fact.”
     – H L Mencken, *Minority Report*

“Kepler doubted astrology, but buttered some bread with it, saying,
‘As every animal has been given by nature some means of getting a
living, so the astronomer has been furnished with astrology in order
to enable him to live.’”
       – Will and Ariel Durant, *The Age of Reason Begins*

“[Modern minds] have been living upon the accumulated capital of ideas
provided for them by the genius of the seventeenth century.”
    – Alfred North Whitehead, *Science and the Modern World*

‘“Truth,” even in science, wilts like a flower.’
      – Will and Ariel Durant, *The Age of Louis XIV*

“I have yet to meet a successful scientist who lacks the ability to
exaggerate the importance of what he or she is doing, and I believe
that someone who lacks a delusional sense of significance will wilt in
the face of repeated experiences of multiple small failures and rare
successes, the fate of most researchers.”
    – Daniel Kahneman, *Thinking, Fast and Slow*

“Behavioral science is not for sissies.”
       – Steven Pinker, *The Blank Slate*

“Astonishingly, the degree of variability [round worms] exhibit
in longevity is not much less than that of a genetically
mixed population of humans, who eat a variety of diets, attend
to or abuse their health, and are subject to all the vagaries
of circumstance—car crashes, tainted beef, enraged postal workers—
of modern industrialized life.”
    – S Austad, “Varied fates from similar states,”
       *Science*, 290.

“Art without science is poverty, and science without
art is barbarism.”       – Will Durant, *Fallen Leaves*

“It is a real puzzle for the science of mind why, when an unpleasant
event befalls us—we slice our thumb along with the bagel, or knock
a glass of beer into our lap—the topic of our conversation turns
abruptly to sexuality, excretion or religion.”
   – Steven Pinker, *The Stuff of Thought*

“Brains are built with a rule of thumb such as ‘If you
experience the sensation of pain, stop whatever you are
doing and don’t do it again.’ It remains a matter for
interesting discussion why it has to be so damned painful.”
      – Richard Dawkins, *The Greatest Show on Earth*

“The difference between life and non-life is a matter
not of substance but of information.”
      – Richard Dawkins, *The Greatest Show on Earth*


“Anyone who believes that the laws of physics are mere social
conventions is invited to try transgressing those conventions from
the windows of my apartment.”
  – Alan Sokal, “A Physicist Experiments with Cultural Studies,”
    *Lingua Franca*, 15 April 1996.

“Physics, chemistry, biochemistry, and molecular biology accept in
principle that the most complex events can be reduced to the laws of
quantum physics, but they carry out the reduction in stages, inserting
four or five layers of theory between gross biological phenomena and
the submicroscopic events of elementary particles. Analogously for
psychology, a theory at the level of symbols, located midway between
complex thought processes and neurons, is essential.”
            – Herbert Simon, *Models of My Life*

“From the beginning we were interested in simulating human problem
solving, and not simply in demonstrating how computers could solve
hard problems.”          – Herbert Simon, *Models of My Life*

“The true line is not between ‘hard’ natural science and ‘soft’ social
sciences, but between precise science limited to highly abstract and
simple phenomena in the laboratory, and inexact science and technology
dealing with complex problems in the real world.”
                 – Herbert Simon, *Models of My Life*

“Each of these views has been held by an important segment of the
cognitive science community, and the two segments do not often
communicate with each other, except sometimes to quarrel.”
      – Herbert Simon, *Models of My Life*

“Apple’s typography guidelines suggest that developers aim for [at
least] a 7:1 contrast ratio. But what ratio, you might ask, is the
text used to state the guideline? It’s 5.5:1.”
        – Kevin Marks, “How the Web Became Unreadable”

“If the scientists have the future in their bones, then the traditional
culture responds by wishing the future did not exist.”
                             – C P Snow, *The Two Cultures*

“Undistracted by schooling, one studies best during vacations.”
   – Carlo Rovelli, *Seven Brief Lessons on Physics*,
       tr Simon Carnell and Erica Segre

“You would need, of course, to study and digest Riemann’s mathematics
in order to master the technique to read and use [Einstein’s field
equations]. It takes a little commitment and effort. But less than is
necessary to come to appreciate the rarefied beauty of a late
Beethoven string quartet. In both cases the reward is sheer beauty and
new eyes with which to see the world.”
   – Carlo Rovelli, *Seven Brief Lessons on Physics*,
       tr Simon Carnell and Erica Segre

“Before experiments, measurements, mathematics, and rigorous
deductions, science is above all about visions.”
   – Carlo Rovelli, *Seven Brief Lessons on Physics*,
       tr Simon Carnell and Erica Segre

“[Renormalization] works in practice but leaves a bitter taste in the
mouth.”        – Carlo Rovelli, *Seven Brief Lessons on Physics*,
                   tr Simon Carnell and Erica Segre

“Mirrored by others, and by other things, we learn who we are.”
      – Carlo Rovelli, *Seven Brief Lessons on Physics*,
          tr Simon Carnell and Erica Segre

“Every complex process can be addressed and understood in different
languages and at different levels.”
      – Carlo Rovelli, *Seven Brief Lessons on Physics*,
          tr Simon Carnell and Erica Segre

“Our moral values, our emotions, our loves are no less real for being
part of nature, for being shared with the animal world, or for being
determined by the evolution that our species has undergone over
millions of years. Rather they are more valuable as a result of this:
they are real.”    – Carlo Rovelli, *Seven Brief Lessons on Physics*,
                      tr Simon Carnell and Erica Segre

“We are perhaps the only species on Earth to be conscious of the
inevitability of our individual mortality. I fear that soon we
shall also have to become the only species that will knowingly
watch the coming of its own collective demise.”
         – Carlo Rovelli, *Seven Brief Lessons on Physics*,
             tr Simon Carnell and Erica Segre

“Life is precious to us because it is ephemeral.”
      – Carlo Rovelli, *Seven Brief Lessons on Physics*,
          tr Simon Carnell and Erica Segre

“The only constructive theory connecting neuroscience and psychology
will arise from the study of software.”
                     – Alan Perlis, “Epigrams in Programming”

“If science teaches us anything, it teaches us to accept our failures,
as well as our successes, with quiet dignity and grace.”
        – Gene Wilder and Mel Brooks, *Young Frankenstein*

“Strong reductionism is not a scientific theory: it is a metaphysical
program…. Its professed aim is to unify science on the basis of the
established model of mathematical physics. Its real role is to
insulate this model from attack by presenting it as the gold standard
of scientific exploration.”
       – Roberto Mangabeira Unger,
             *The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time* (I)

“To think of the universe as a whole rather than of something within
the universe is one of the two most ambitious tasks that thought can
undertake. Nothing matches it in ambition other than our attempts to
form a view of ourselves.”
       – Roberto Mangabeira Unger and Lee Smolin
             *The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time*

“I feel that the agenda of life’s important issues has moved from
novelists to science writers, because they know more.”
                     – Douglas Adams, *The Salmon of Doubt*

“By and large it is uniformly true in mathematics that there is a time
lapse between a mathematical discovery and the moment when it is
useful; and that this lapse of time can be anything from 30 to 100
years, in some cases even more.”
  – John von Neumann, “The Role of Mathematics in the Sciences
                       and in Society”

“Any discussion of the nature of intellectual effort in any field is
difficult, unless it presupposes an easy, routine familiarity with
that field. In mathematics this limitation becomes very severe.”
      – John von Neumann, “The Mathematician”

“You should call it entropy … no one really knows what entropy really
is, so in a debate you will always have the advantage.”
   – John von Neumann to Claude Shannon,
     quoted in *Scientific American*, September, 1971

“In mathematics you don't understand things. You just get used to them.”
   – John von Neumann to Claude Shannon, quoted by Gary Zukav,
                                         *The Dancing Wu Li Masters*

“With four parameters I can fit an elephant, and with five I can make
him wiggle his trunk.”
  – attributed to John von Neumann by Enrico Fermi, as quoted
    by Freeman Dyson, *Nature*, 22 January 2004

“men only disagree / Of creatures rational”
  – John Milton, *Paradise Lost*

“Social scientists should never predict the future; it’s
hard enough to predict the past.”
      – Steven Pinker, *The Better Angels of Our Nature*

“When psychologists are confronted with a timeless
mystery, they run an experiment.”
      – Steven Pinker, *The Better Angels of Our Nature*

‘Perhaps “thinking out of the box” has become rare
because the Internet is itself a box.’
 – Donald Geman and Stuart Geman, “Science in the age of selfies”

“If you are … in an environment where you don't have to make
assumptions during programming that you might have to change
later you might be freer to use a language without compile-
time computing. I've never seen good specs before I started
coding, though, not even in physics. We know nothing.”
   – Martin Cracauer, on the pro@common-lisp.net mailing list

“When I heard the learn’d astronomer, / When the proofs, the figures,
were ranged in columns before me, / When I was shown the charts and
diagrams, to add, divide, and measure them, / When I sitting heard the
astronomer where he lectured with much applause to the lecture room, /
How soon unaccountable I became tired and sick, / Till rising and
gliding out I wander’d off by myself, / In the mystical moist
night-air, and from time to time, / Look’d up in perfect silence at
the stars.”       – Walt Whitman, *Drum-taps*

“While science and technology play critical roles in sustaining modern
civilization, they are not part of our culture in the sense that they
are not commonly studied or well comprehended…. It frequently appears
that some people will believe almost anything. Thus judgments can be
manipulated or warped by unscrupulous groups. Distortions or outright
falsehoods can come to be accepted as fact.”
   – Henry Ward Kendall, *A Distant Light*

“Engineering is too important to wait for science.”
      – Benoît Mandelbrot, "Fractal Finance"

“Behavioral scientists often disagree over not only the facts but also
over what is worth studying in the first place. What one school of
thought dismisses as a minor anomaly of no conceivable interest to any
gainfully employed grown-up, another school elevates to center
stage.”     – Philip E Tetlock, *Expert Political Judgment*

“Failing to learn everything is not tantamount to learning
nothing.”     – Philip E Tetlock, *Expert Political Judgment*

“Science is the knowledge of Consequences, and dependence of one fact
upon another: by which, out of that we can presently do, we know how
to do something else when we will, or the like, another time.”
                 – Thomas Hobbes, *Leviathan*

“Learning from the past is hard, in part, because history
is a terrible teacher. By the generous standards of the
laboratory sciences, Clio is stingy in her feedback.”
         – Philip E Tetlock, *Expert Political Judgment*

“Whatever the formal logical status, counterfactual
beliefs often feel factual to their holders.”
       – Philip E Tetlock, *Expert Political Judgment*

“Science explained people, but could not understand them.”
       – E M Forster, *Howards End*

“Whatever has the air of a paradox, and is contrary to the first and
most unprejudiced notions of mankind, is often greedily embraced by
philosophers, as shewing the superiority of their science.”
          – David Hume, *A Treatise of Human Nature*

“Progress in knowledge, science, comforts, and power is only progress
in means; if there is no improvement in ends, purposes, or desires,
progress is a delusion.”  – Will and Ariel Durant, *The Age of Voltaire*

“The influence of science, strange to say, was least and last upon
technology. Man’s ways of sowing and reading, mining and
manufacturing, building and transporting, had been formed through
centuries of trial and error, and traditions and inertia only
reluctantly accepted improvements suggested by laboratory experiments;
not till the end of this era did science accelerate the Industrial
Revolution.”       – Will and Ariel Durant, *The Age of Voltaire*

“Two priesthoods came into conflict: the one devoted to the molding of
character through religion, the other to the education of the
intellect through science. The first priesthood predominates in ages
of poverty or disaster, when men are grateful for spiritual comfort
and moral order; the second in ages of progressive wealth, when men
incline to limit their hopes to the earth.”
          – Will and Ariel Durant, *The Age of Voltaire*

“Of all the audacities of science the most daring is the attempt to
fling its measuring rods around the stars, to subject those
scintillating beauties to nocturnal spying, to analyze their
constituents across a billion miles, and to confine their motions to
man-made logic and laws. Mind and the heavens are the poles of our
wonder and study, and the greatest wonder is mind legislating for the
firmament.”             – Will and Ariel Durant, *The Age of Voltaire*

“The sweetest and most inoffensive path of life leads through the
avenues of science and learning; and whoever can either remove any
obstructions in this way, or open up any new prospect, ought so far to
be esteemed a benefactor to mankind.”
       – David Hume, *An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding*

“Accuracy is, in every case, advantageous to beauty, and just
reasoning to delicate sentiment.”
       – David Hume, *An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding*

“The philosopher should not be the inventor of systems but the
apostle of truth.” – Gaetano Filangieri, *The Science of Legislation*

“Perhaps the poet [Goethe] was right in thinking that the chief aim
of science should not be to equip old desires with new tools, but to
enlarge wisdom with knowledge for the enlightenment of desire.”
         – Will and Ariel Durant, *Rousseau and Revolution*

“The work of science, though ultimately exciting, is mostly
painstakingly methodical and boring. But that is the price we
pay because we don’t just want to believe. We want to know.”
       – Adam Frank, the *New York Times*, 30 May 2021

“The American game of football is my favorite sport to
watch, because of the variety of behavior exhibited.”
 – A Zee, *Fearful Symmetry: The Search for Beauty in Modern Physics*

“Here, the reader will find no narcissistic cry of mathematics for
mathematics’ sake. To the contrary, we physicist-chauvinst-pigs regard
mathematics as the mere handmaiden of physics. Flights of mathematical
fancy are tolerated only insofar as they are tethered to observable
physical phenomena.”
        – Sheldon Glashow, introduction to Howard Georgi,
          *Lie Algebras in Particle Physics*

“I think that group theory, perhaps because it seems to give
information for free, has been more misued in contemporary
particle physics than any other branch of mathematics, except
geometry. Students should learn the difference between physics
and mathematics from the start.”
    – Howard Georgi, *Lie Algebras in Particle Physics*

“It is easy to produce complicated behavior with a
complicated design…. Nature, whose complexity emerges
from simplicity, is cleverer.”   – A Zee, *Fearful Symmetry*

“Experimental and theoretical pysics attract rather different
personality types, with different temperaments and abilities.
Sociologits should find here a ripe field for a fruitful study.”
      – A Zee, *Fearful Symmetry*

“I am not particularly interested in the details of how the K meson
decays—in itself, that is no more interesting than, say, the
behavior of chemicals with unpronounceable names.”
      – A Zee, *Fearful Symmetry*

“The mind of God appears to be abstract but not complicated. He
also appears to like group theory.”   – A Zee, *Fearful Symmetry*

“Bohr’s contemporaries found it extremely difficult to swallow this
picture, but they had no real choice in the face of the overwhelming
experimental fact that the world has been around for quite a while.”
      – A Zee, *Fearful Symmetry*

“The uranium nucleus, with its 92 protons and its 140 (or so)
neutrons, is prone to fission at the drop of a hat. The electric
repulsion tears the nucleus apart and in the process liberates a
certain amount of energy that we humans have tried to put to a
variety of uses, some more sensible than others.”
      – A Zee, *Fearful Symmetry*

“As an indication of the confused experimental situation in the early
1960s, consider the fact that of twenty-six hadrons (with certain
properties) listed in a survey published in 1963, nineteen are now
known not to exist.”      – A Zee, *Fearful Symmetry*

“Quarks behave like some lovers. When they are far apart they pine
for each other with zeal, vowing that no one can ever separate them.
But once they get close to each other, they replace their ardor with
indifference and barely communicate with each other.”
      – A Zee, *Fearful Symmetry*

“Those of us who aspire to be fundamental physicists must spend
a considerable amount to time learning how to add an infinite
number of amplitudes together.”      – A Zee, *Fearful Symmetry*

‘When He supposedly said, “Let there be light!” perhaps He actually
said, “Let there be an SU(5) Yang-Mills theory with all its gauge
bosons, let the symmetry be broken down spontaneously, and let all but
one of the remaining massless gauge bosons be sold into infrared
slavery. That one last gauge boson is my favorite. Let him rush forth
to illumnate all of my creations!”’    – A Zee, *Fearful Symmetry*

“There are two striking facts about the universe we live in:
(1) The universe is not empty of matter; and (2) the universe
is almost empty of matter.”      – A Zee, *Fearful Symmetry*

‘The “paradox” is only a conflict between reality and
your feeling of what reality “ought to be.”’
    – Richard Feynman, *The Feynman Lectures on Physics*

“If I were forced to sum up in one sentence what the Copenhagen
interpretation [of quantum mechanics] says to me, it would be ‘Shut up
and calculate!’”    – N David Mermin, *Physics Today*, April 1989,
                      though frequently misattributed to Richard Feynman

“All science is either physics or stamp collecting.”
  – attributed to Ernest Rutherford by J B Birks
    in *Rutherford at Manchester*

“I had spent six years slugging my way through many dozens of physics
textbooks that were carefully written with the best of pedagogical
plans, but there was something missing. Physics is the most
interesting subject in the world because it is about how the world
works, and yet the textbooks had been thoroughly wrung of any
connection with the real world. The fun was missing.”
  – the preface to the 10th edition of Halliday and Resnick’s
    *Fundamentals of Physics*

a
“Physicists use the wave theory on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays
and the particle theory on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays.”
    – attributed to William Henry Bragg by Alan L Mackay

“Mathematical physics represents the purest image that the view of
nature may generate in the human mind…. This image is to physical
nature what music is to the thousand noises of which the air is
full.”  – attributed to Théophile de Donder by Ilya Prigogine in
          the latter’s 1977 Nobel Prize autobiographical statement

“Every mathematician knows it is impossible to understand
an elementary course in thermodynamics.”
          – V I Arnold, “Contact geometry”

“Thermodynamics is a funny subject. The first time you go through it,
you don't understand it at all. The second time you go through it, you
think you understand it, except for one or two small points. The third
time you go through it, you know you don't understand it, but by that
time you are so used to it, it doesn't bother you any more.”
  – attributed to Arnold Sommerfeld by Salvatore Califano, in
    *Pathways to Modern Chemical Physics*

“Nothing in life is certain except death, taxes and the second
law of thermodynamics.”    – Seth Lloyd, *Nature*, 26 August 2004
[Unless you are *Turritopsis dohrnii*, in which case only one of
the above is unavoidable.]

“It’s the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Sooner or later
everything turns to shit.”   – Woody Allen, *Husbands and Wives*

“S happens.”
  – an anonymous observation on the second law of thermodynamics

“If you think things are in a mess now, just wait.”
  – an anonymous observation on the second law of thermodynamics

“Pysicists and mathematicians have settled on a fine division of
labor in which the former complain about the finickiness of the
latter, and the latter complain about the sloppiness of the former.”
    – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Lost in Math*

“Results in psychology…are hard to reproduce because no two people
are alike, and it is rarely known exactly which human quirks might
play a role. But that’s a problem we don’t have in physics. Helium
atoms don’t get hungry and are just as well-tempered on Monday as
on Friday.”    – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Lost in Math*

“When I was in school I hated history, but since then I have
come to recognize the usefulness of quoting dead people to
support my convictions.”   – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Lost in Math*

“Infinite bases have nothing to do with ‘infinite linear
combinations.’ The reader who feels an irresistible urge to inject
power series into this example should study the example carefully
again. If that does not effect a cure, he should consider restricting
his attention to finite-dimensional spaces from now on.”
    – Kennth Hoffman and Ray Kunze, *Linear Algebra*

“I’m too early, and so Ι seek out the library down the hallway.
Familiar books greet me. The wooden floor squeaks, and I stop
moving, not wanting to interrupt the potentially world-changing
thoughts. It smells like science, by which I mean coffee.”
   – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Lost in Math*

“There are lots of diseases in academia, and one of them
is that you keep doing what you’ve been doing.”
   – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Lost in Math*

“The human idea of simplicity is…very much based on ease of
applicability, which is closely tied to our ability to grasp
an idea, hold it in mind, and push it around until a paper
falls out.”         – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Lost in Math*

“In the multiverse of eternal inflation, with an infinite number of
recurrences launched by random, quantum fluctuations, anything that
can happen will eventually happen. Eternal inflation therefore implies
that there are universes in which the history of mankind plays out in
any way that is compatibile with the laws of nature. In some of them
this will make sense to you.”    – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Lost in Math*

“Theoretical physicists used to explain what was observed. Now they
try to explain why they can’t explain what was not observed.”
        – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Lost in Math*

“When people tell you something’s wrong or doesn’t work for them, they
are almost always right. When they tell you exactly what they think is
wrong and how to fix it, they are almost always wrong.”
 – Neil Gaiman,  “Rules for Writing”, *The Guardian*, 19 Feburary 2010

“Physicists don’t have a lot of business with the science of
self-aware conscious beings.”    – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Lost in Math*

“These are just the main interpretations of quantum mechanics.
There are more, and each of them can be in several different
states at the same time.”   – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Lost in Math*

‘“The difficultty, of course, is that you don’t have to settle these
issues,” Weinberg continues. “I’ve had a whole career without knowing
what quantum mechanics is….My colleague Philip Candelas was referring
to a graduate studen whose career essentially disintigrated, and I
asked him what went wrong and he said ’He tried to understand quamtum
mechanics.’ He could have had a perfectly good career without it. But
getting into the fundamentals of quantum mechanics is a losing game.”
(If you quote this, you can be the first person to quote someone
quoting someone quoting himself quoting someone.)’
                – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Lost in Math*

“All these clues [pointing to supersymmetry] could be misleading, but
that would be a really cruel joke by Mother Nature—and in really bad
taste on her part.”
     – Frank Wilczek, “Physicist’s nightmare scenario: the Higgs and
       nothing else,” *Science*, 315:1657–1658 (2007)

“String theory is attractive because it offers jobs….String theory is
cheap. If you are the chairperson of a physics department in a remote
place without much money you cannot afford…experimental physics, but
you can afford to hire a couple of string theorists…and have a modern
physics department.”  – Freeman Dyson, “Birds and Frogs,”
                        *Notices of the AMS*, 56(2):221 (2009)

“You’d think that scientists, with the professional task of being
objective, would protect their creative freedom and rebel against
the need to please colleagues in order to secure continued funding.
They don’t”          – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Lost in Math*

“Almost all scientists today have an undisclosed conflict of interest
between funding and honesty.”    – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Lost in Math*

“You can be wrong with math. But you can’t lie. And it’s true—
you can’t lie with math. But it greatly aids obfuscation.”
        – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Lost in Math*

“It is hardly surprising that physicists find beauty in the laws
of nature. If you sat through math class seeing equations as
unsightly scribbles, you probably didn’t go on to become a
theoretical physicist.”     – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Lost in Math*

“If there isn’t a cognitive bias for trying to kill too many birds
with one stone, there should be one.”
       – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Lost in Math*

“Physics isn’t math. It’s choosing the right math.”
                 – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Lost in Math*

“Unlike physicists, mathematicians take paradoxes seriously.”
   – Hongyu Guo, *What Are Tensors Exactly?*

a
“In the 1970s, it became clear that the clocks participating in TAI
[essentially UTC without the leap seconds] were ticking at different
rates due to gravitational time dilation, and the combined TAI scale,
therefore, corresponded to an average of the altitudes of the various
clocks. Starting from the Julian Date 2443144.5 (1 January 1977
00:00:00), corrections were applied to the output of all participating
clocks, so that TAI would correspond to proper time at the geoid (mean
sea level). Because the clocks were, on average, well above sea level,
this meant that TAI slowed by about one part in a trillion.”
  – *Wikipedia*, paraphrasing the considerably geekier presentation
    in Dennis McCarthy and Kenneth Seidelmann, *Time: From Earth
    Rotation to Atomic Physics*

“It’s actually bad luck to say ‘MacBook’ inside an office.
You have to call it ‘The Scottish Laptop.’”
     – Nathalie Kernot, *Twitter*, 12 April 2022

“Despite initial reluctance to accept time determined by means other
than from astronomical observations of the Earth’s rotation, atomic
time began to be accepted gradually…. [Finally] it was formally
adopted as the unit of time in 1968 with only one abstention, the
representative of the Greenwich Observatory, I regret to say.”
          – Dennis McCarthy and Kenneth Seidelmann,
            *Time: From Earth Rotation to Atomic Physics*

“Humans have free will, unfortunately.”
    – Christian Lebiere, personal communication, 10 May 2022

“For a hypothetical gaseous but intelligent citizen of Jupiter or of a
hydrogen cloud somewhere in the galactic center, the properties of
ordinary crystals might well be a more baffling and intriguing puzzle
than those of superfluid helium.”
    – P W Anderson, “More is Different”, *Science*, 4 August 1972

“Like Stephen Hawking’s editor’s motto that every equation halves your
sales, every parameter halves the chance of getting the experiment
right.”    – Christian Lebiere, personal communication, 11 August 2022

“Physicists are really good at answering questions, but really
bad at explaining why anyone should care about their answers.”
    – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Existential Physics*

“I think Max Tegmark came up with the mathematical universe
hypothesis only to make sure everyone knows he is a seriously
weird fellow. He was probably successful at that.”
          – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Existential Physics*

“You can find many different diagnoses in death certificates, but
they’re just details. What really kills us is entropy increase.”
          – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Existential Physics*

“I believe [Boltzman brains] fail the Monty Python
test: Stop that! That’s just too silly!”
 – Seth Lloyd, quoted by Lisa Grossman, the *New Scientist*, 14 May 2014

“Academia is full of genteel savagery.”
    – Judea Pearl and Dana Mackenzie, *The Book of Why*

“Statistics, as frequently practiced, discourages [scientific
thinking] and encourages ‘canned’ procedures instead. Scientists
will always prefer routine calculation on data to methods that
challenge their scientific knowledge.”
    – Judea Pearl and Dana Mackenzie, *The Book of Why*

“We probably will not succeed in creating humanlike intelligence
until we can create childlike intelligence.”
      – Judea Pearl and Dana Mackenzie, *The Book of Why*

“In both a cognitive and a philosophical sense, the idea of causes
and effects is much more fundamental than the idea of probability.”
      – Judea Pearl and Dana Mackenzie, *The Book of Why*

“The virtuous man contents himself with dreaming
that which the wicked man does in actual life.”
  – Sigmund Freud, *The Interpretation of Dreams*, paraphrasing Plato

“Though Haraclitus didn’t actually write [‘You could not step twice
into the same river’]. Is a quote in which word after word has been
replaced until none of the original words remain still the same quote?
The answer is left as an exercise for the reader.”
          – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Existential Physics*

“There are no exact metaphors, not for quantum mechanics and not
for anything else, because if they were exact, they wouldn’t be
metaphors.”          – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Existential Physics*

“String theorists originally hoped they’d be able to calculate
the constants of nature. That didn’t pan out, so now they argue
that if they can’t calculate the constants, that must mean all
possible values exists somewhere in a multiverse.”
       – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Existential Physics*

“We don’t yet know exactly how to define consciousness, or exactly
which brain functions are necessary for it, but it’s a property we
observe exclusively in physical system. Because, well, we observe
only physical systems. If you think your own thoughts are an
exception to this, try thinking without your brain. Good luck.”
       – Sabine Hossenfelder, *Existential Physics*

“If you stop a statistician in the street and ask, ‘What does
confounding mean to you?’ you will probably get one of the most
convoluted and confounded answers you ever heard from a scientist.”
      – Judea Pearl and Dana Mackenzie, *The Book of Why*

“The smoking-cancer debate was unusually personal
for many of the scientists who participated in it.”
      – Judea Pearl and Dana Mackenzie, *The Book of Why*

“Logic void of representation is metaphysics.”
      – Judea Pearl and Dana Mackenzie, *The Book of Why*

“When reading a scientific article, I often catch myself jumping
from formula to formula, skipping the words altogether. To me, a
formula is a baked idea. Words are ideas in the oven.”
      – Judea Pearl and Dana Mackenzie, *The Book of Why*

“Artificial intelligence has turned out to be a more elusive goal
than Turing ever suspected, even though the sheer computational
power of computers has no doubt exceeded his expectations.”
      – Judea Pearl and Dana Mackenzie, *The Book of Why*

“As science fiction has shown over and over again, Asimov’s
laws always lead to contradictions. To AI scientists this
comes as no surprise: rule-based systems never turn out well.”
      – Judea Pearl and Dana Mackenzie, *The Book of Why*

“A good scientific idea has to be falsifiable. Particle
physicists seem to have misconstrued this to mean that
any falsifiable idea is also good science.”
     – Sabine Hossenfelder, the *Guardian*, 26 September 2022

“For the last century the biggest bar fight in science has been
between Albert Einstein and himself.”
    – Dennis Overbye, the *New York Times*, 10 October 2022

“Humans today rely on cognitive faculties that worked well enough in
traditional societies, but which we now see are infested with bugs....
They are not so much intuitive scientists as intuitive lawyers and
politicians.”       – Steven Pinker, *Enlightenment Now*

“If you had to choose one moment in history in which to be born, and
you didn't know in advance whether you were going to be male or
female, which country you were going to be from, what your status was,
you'd choose right now.”
    – Barack Obama, keynote address to the Goalkeepers 2017 conference

“A quantitative mindset, despite its nerdy aura, is in fact the
morally enlightened one, because it treats every human life as having
equal value rather than privileging the people who are closest to us
or most photogenic.”     – Steven Pinker, *Enlightenment Now*

“Life pits biology against physics in mortal combat.”
  – Peter Hoffman, “Physics Makes Aging Inevitable”,
                   *Nautilus*, 12 May 2016

“Three quarters of Americans believe in at least one phenomenon that
defies the laws of science, including psychic healing (55 percent),
extrasensory perception (41 percent), haunted houses (37 percent) and
ghosts (32 percent)—which also means that some people believe in
houses haunted by ghosts without believing in ghosts.”
    – Steven Pinker, *Rationality*, citing statistics from a Gallup
      poll described by D W Moore, 2005

“This book is not a reference, but a course. It doesn’t try to
support random access. Rather, it expects sequential access. This
has immense pedagogical advantages, but it has the disadvantage
of violating how most scientists actually read books.”
        – Richard McElreath, *Statistical Rethinking*

“Mistaking a nonrandom *pattern* for a nonrandom *process* is one of
the thickest chapters in the annals of human folly, and knowing the
difference between them is one of the greatest gifts of rationality
that education can confer.”    – Steven Pinker, *Rationality*

a
“Any theory that can account for all the facts is wrong, because
some of the facts are wrong.”       – attributed to Francis Crick

“In the world in which we evolved and most of the world in which
we spend our days, it makes no sense to ignore everything you know.
It does make sense in certain unnatural worlds—logic courses,
brainteasers, computer programming, legal proceedings....”
     – Steven Pinker, *Rationality*

“The physics of undergraduate text-books is 90% true; the contents
of the primary research journals of physics is 90% false.”
  – John Ziman, *Reliable Knowledge*

“Some theories are unlovable. No one has much affection for
the laws of thermodynamics.”  – Steven Pinker, *Rationality*

“In cognitive science and behavioral economics, showing all
the ways in which people flout the axioms of rational choice
has become something of a sport.”    – Steven Pinker, *Rationality*

“An infinite number of curves can be drawn through any finite
set of points; an unlimited number of theories are logically
consistent with any body of data.”  – Steven Pinker, *Rationality*

“It is important to realize how profound Planck’s insight [natural
units] was. Nature herself, far transcending any silly English King or
some self-important French revolutionary committee, gives us a set of
units to measure her by.”  – A Zee, *Einstein Gravity in a Nutshell*

“This not sufficiently described as a change from dogmatism to
empiricism. Mere empiricists like Telesius or Bacon achieved nothing.
What was fruitful in the thought of the new scientists was the bold
use of mathematics in the construction of hypotheses, test not by
observation simply but by controlled observation of phenomena that
could be precisely measured.”
    – C S Lewis,  *English Literature in the Sixteenth Century*

“The reason is not clear, but it seems to be true that
mathematicians do some of their most valuable practical
work when thinking about problems that appear to have
nothing whatever to do with physical reality.”
  – George F Simmons, *Differential Equations With Applications*,
     when discussing the applicability of the work of 19th century
     mathematician Charles Hermite to quantum mechanics

“We have lost the art of living; and in the most important science
of all, the science of daily life, the science of behavior, we are
complete ignoramuses. We have psychology instead.”
        – D H Lawrence, *Sketches of Etruscan Places*

“The more the elementary particle physicists tell us about
the nature of the fundamental laws, the less relevance they
seem to have to the very real problems of the rest of science,
much less to those of society.”
   – P W Anderson, “More is Different”, *Science*, 4 August 1972

“In the biological realm, it is the local rules of particular
environments, not the universal rules of physics, that determine
what survives. And the biological rules are much more persnickety.
Don’t expect a giraffe to survive underwater.”
      – David Christian, *Origin Story*

“If we meet living organisms elsewhere in our galaxy, we
probably won’t be shaking hands with them but peering at
them through a microscope.”   – David Christian, *Origin Story*

“Today, the biosphere has 30 tons of bacteria and archaea for
every ton of animal.”  – Andrew Knoll, *A Brief History of Earth*

“Over billions of years, Earth’s first simple organisms have
given rise to a staggering diversity of species, including one
with the audacity to ask how we got here.”
      – Andrew Knoll, *A Brief History of Earth*

“When sputnik and Apollo 11 fired the imagination of the world,
everyone began predicting that by the end of the century, people
would be living in space colonies on Mars and Pluto. Few of these
forecasts came true. On the other hand, nobody foresaw the Internet.”
        – Yuval Noah Harari, *Sapiens*

“Today, a single affluent family generally has more
timepieces at home than an entire medieval country.”
        – Yuval Noah Harari, *Sapiens*

“Rats and cockroaches, for example, are in their heyday. These
tenacious creatures would probably creep out from beneath the smoking
rubble of a nuclear Armageddon, ready and able to spread their DNA.
Perhaps 65 million years from now, intelligent rats will look back
gratefully on the decimation wrought by humankind, just as we today
can thank that dinosaur-busting asteroid.”
        – Yuval Noah Harari, *Sapiens*

“For decades, aluminium was much more expensive than gold. In the
1860s, Emperor Napoleon III of France commissioned aluminium cutlery
to be laid out for his most distinguished guests. Less important
visitors had to make do with the gold knives and forks.”
        – Yuval Noah Harari, *Sapiens*

“Physics rests on the democratic ideal.... It should not depend
on the observer.”   – A Zee, *Einstein Gravity in a Nutshell*
[It amuses me that this is a 900 page nutshell.]

“History warns us that it is the customary fate of new truths to begin
as heresies.”  – Thomas Huxley, “The Coming of Age of the Origin of
                 Species,” *Nature*, 6 May 1880

“Some 15–20 Burgess Species cannot be allied with any known group.
Magnify some of them...and you are on the set of a science-fiction
film.”‘  – Stephen Jay Gould, *Wonderful Life*

“Most of the scientists he’d met were profoundly superstitious.”
  – Louise Penny, *The Madness of Crowds*

“If I can’t share the awe that *Tyrannosaurus* inspires
in my son, it is, quite simply, a failing of maturity.”
  – Andrew Knoll, *Life on a Young Planet*
[cf. “The learn'd astronomer”]

‘To me, the emergence of life as a defining—perhaps *the* defining —
feature of our planet is extraordinary. How often has this happened in
the vastness of the universe? That’s what I think about when I look up
“in the perfect silence at the stars.”’
  – Andrew Knoll, *Life on a Young Planet*

“Awe and humility attended the telling of earlier creation stories.
They are appropriate companions to sciences’s version, as well.”
  – Andrew Knoll, *Life on a Young Planet*

a
“I look at the natural geological record, as a history of the world
imperfectly kept, and written in a changing dialect; of this history
we possess the last volume alone...Of this volume, only here and there
a short chapter has been preserved; and of each page, only here and
there a few lines."  Charles Darwin, *On the Origin of Species*

“As large animals, we can be forgiven for holding a worldview that
celebrates ourselves, but, in truth, this outlook is dead wrong. We
have evolved to fit into a bacterial world, and not the reverse.”
  – Andrew Knoll, *Life on a Young Planet*

“Size and shape surely favor eukaryotes, but morphology provides only
one of several yardsticks for measuring ecological significance.
Metabolism—how an organism obtains materials and energy—is
another, and by this criterion, it is the prokaryotes that dazzle with
their diversity.     – Andrew Knoll, *Life on a Young Planet*

“*Pyrolobus fumarii* ... cannot grow at the temperatures used to
pasteurize milk—not because they are too hot, but because they are
too cold!”     – Andrew Knoll, *Life on a Young Planet*

“Chert lifts the paleontological heart.”
      – Andrew Knoll, *Life on a Young Planet*

“If oxygen wrought revolutionary change, cyanobacteria were the heroes
of the revolution.”      – Andrew Knoll, *Life on a Young Planet*

“The capacity to change rapidly but persist indefinitely may epitomize
bacterial evolution.”      – Andrew Knoll, *Life on a Young Planet*

“Bacteria are particularly good at doing nothing. When the surrounding
environment is favorable...bacteria multiple rapidly...when ambient
conditions do not favor growth they are able to persist...most
bacteria at most times may exists in a state of metabolic torpor.”
    – Andrew Knoll, *Life on a Young Planet*

“Adaptation [of bacteria] to novel environments can easily be
investigated in the course of a Ph.D. thesis or federal grant —
critical timescales for laboratory biologists, but instantaneous by
geological standards.”    – Andrew Knoll, *Life on a Young Planet*

‘The argument is comfortably simple, it makes intuitive sense, and it
relies on natural history of the kind that “every schoolboy knows.” In
short, it is just the sort of proposition that graduate students love
to dismantle.’      – Andrew Knoll, *Life on a Young Planet*

“We shall not cease from exploration / And the end of all our
exploring / Will be to arrive where we started / And know the place
for the first time.”  – T S Eliot, “Little Gidding”

“Dialogue between religion and science matters not so much because it
hold the prospect of consensus on our past, but because we need to
agree about our future.”    – Andrew Knoll, *Life on a Young Planet*

“Our grandchildren may know the rhinoceros only from pictures, the
rain forest from parks, and coral reefs from history books. Even as we
search for life on Mars, we risk losing it on Earth.”
    – Andrew Knoll, *Life on a Young Planet*

“I truly have no idea what so many people are raving about. It’s as if
someone went into their heads while they were sleeping and planted the
idea that *Inception* is a visionary masterpiece and—hold on … Whoa!
I think I get it. The movie is a metaphor for the power of delusional
hype—a metaphor for itself.”
  – David Edelstein, *New York*, 9 July 2010

“Perhaps he [David Hume] was secretly relieved to learn that
after all, despite Berkeley, the external world existed, and
that, despite Hume, Hume was real.”
    – Will and Ariel Durant, *Rousseau and Revolution*

“Intellectual Evolution...consists principally in the emergence of
modes of thinking appropriate for larger and larger human
groupings...This transferability has been manifested in the last five
hundred years in the growth of science, with its striving for
culture-free criteria for acceptance.”
  – Andrew Sherratt, “Reviving the Grand Narrative”,
    *Journal of European Archaeology*, 1995

“We see complex structures in part because we are built to see
complex structures. All living organisms have to map their environment
in order to survive....They have to be pattern detectors.”
     – David Christian, *Maps of Time*

‘Mass literacy began the process of “disenchanting” the world
by undermining he authority of traditional, often semi-magical,
forms of thinking.’     – David Christian, *Maps of Time*

“Of all our senses it is vision that most informs the mind. We
are versatile diurnal primates with a big visual cortex.”
  – Philip and Phylis Morrison, *Powers of Ten*

“The world is displayed by our science in diverse ways, by
manifold instruments and by elaborate theories that no single
person can claim any longer to master in all detail.”
  – Philip and Phylis Morrison, *Powers of Ten*

“The domain of quantum motion...is both the most surprising of
all the remarkable discoveries of physics and the one that most
resembles everyday life. For it is not the almanac that governs
much everyday experience, nor is it the more or less accidental
orbits of gravitating systems. What we find is material
stability: Like begets like; gold always glitters; bread is
nourishing.... No two planets are alike; yet all electrons are
identical, and so are all atoms, taken species by species.”
  – Philip and Phylis Morrison, *Powers of Ten*

“I know my herbs. They have fixed properties, and follow sacred rules.
Human creatures do not so. And I cannot even wish they did. I would
not have one scruple of their complexity done away, it would be a
lamentable loss.”    – Ellis Peters, *Saint Peter’s Fair*

“Mankind is made of star-stuff.”
  – attributed to Harlow Shapley, by Phil Morrison, et al.,
    in *Powers of Ten*

“The world we live in is much younger than you might expect.... There
have been roughly 600 generations since human beings first ceased to
be hunter-gatherers.... What we may term historical humankind (humans
who have left written records behind them), as opposed to
archaeological humankind... has existed only for...some 300
generations....This is the true length of human history; before that
there were two million years of prehistory.”
     – David Wootton, *The Invention of Science*

“The nova of 1572 was not the cause of the Scientific Revolution, any
more that the bullet which killed Archduke Franz Ferdinand on 28 June
1914 was the cause of the First World War. Nevertheless, the nova
marks, quite precisely, the beginning of the Revolution, as the death
of the archduke marks the beginning of the war.”
     – David Wootton, *The Invention of Science*

“With all its imperfections, modern science is a technique that is
sufficiently well tuned to nature so that it works—it is a practice
that allows us to learn reliable things about the world.”
   – Steven Weinberg, *To Explain the World*

“In the years since Snow’s lecture the two-cultures problem has
deepened; history of science, far from serving as a bridge between
the arts and the sciences, nowadays offers the scientists a picture
of themselves that most of them cannot recognize. It has become part
of the problem, not part of the solution.”
     – David Wootton, *The Invention of Science*

“There is no such thing as the Scientific Revolution, and this
is a book about it.”  – Steven Shapin, *The Scientific Revolution*

“[Wittgenstein] maintained...at one time that all existential
propositions are meaningless.... I invited him to consider the
proposition: ‘There is no hippopotamus in this room at present.’
When he refused to believe this, I looked under all the desks
without finding one; but he remained unconvinced.”
 – Bertrand Russell, “Obituary: Ludwig Wittgenstein”, *Mind*, July 1951

“No one should be surprised if histories and philosophies
of science which start from Wittgenstein seem to miss the
very things that science is all about.”
     – David Wootton, *The Invention of Science*

“The whole, wonderful point of some experiences—music, sex,
laughter—is that there are not and never will be any adequate words to
describe them. This does not mean they do not exist.”
     – David Wootton, *The Invention of Science*

“In an extraordinary labour of love, every surviving copy of the first
(1543) and the second (1566) editions of *On the Revolutions* has now
been studied to identify the marginal comments written by its first
readers.... They like Copernicanism as a mathematical device; they had
no time for it as scientific truth.”
     – David Wootton, *The Invention of Science*

“Historians of astronomy trade insults on the question of whether
there are equants in Copernicus or not.”
     – David Wootton, *The Invention of Science*

“They are deceiv’d that acquiesce to things which they
have heard, and believe not what they have seen.”
  – Thomas Bartholin, *The Anatomical History* (1653)

“Philosophy is written in this very great book which always lies open
before out eyes (I mean the universe), but one cannot understand it
unless one first learns to understand the language...in which it is
written. It is written in mathematical language...without these means
it is humanly impossible to understand a word of it; without these
there is only clueless scrabbling around in a dark labyrinth.”
   – Galileo, *The Assayer* (1623)

“What I cannot create, I do not understand.”
  – Richard Feynman, on his blackboard at the time of his death

“Contrary to the opinion of the publisher of Stephen Hawking’s *A
Short [sic] History of Time*, we believe that, for students, every
additional equation in worked out examples will double readership.”
   – C F Chan Man Fong, *et al.*,
     *Advanced Mathematics for Applied and Pure Sciences*

“For of meridians and parallels / Man hath weaved out a net, and this
net thrown / Upon the heavens, and now they are his own. / Loth to go
up the hill, or labour thus / To go to heaven, we make heaven come to
us.”  – John Donne, “An Anatomy of the World: The First Anniversary”

“No competent astronomer defended the traditional Ptolemaic
system once they had heard that Venus had a full set of phases;
you had to be an ill-informed philosopher to do so.”
     – David Wootton, *The Invention of Science*

“The metric system merely completed a process that had begun with the
invention of the telescope, which definitively destroyed the idea
that the universe was made on the same scale as man.”
     – David Wootton, *The Invention of Science*

“The key change occurred in 1608 with the invention of the telescope
and the microscope. Instruments are prostheses for thinking, and act
as agents of change.”    – David Wootton, *The Invention of Science*

“The importance of an intellectual change simply cannot
be measured by the amount of controversy it generates.”
     – David Wootton, *The Invention of Science*

“The distinction between magic and science can be expressed by saying
that in science there is progress, but in magic there isn’t.”
    – Ludwig Wittgenstein, *Remarks on Frazer’s Golden Bough*

“The discovery of the barometer transformed physics, just
as the discovery of the telescope transformed astronomy.”
  – Vincenzo Antinori, *Notizie Istoriche*,
    tr David Wooton

“The history of science has its own revolutions, just like the history
of nations...with this significant difference, that revolutions in
science...successfully achieve what they set out to do.”
  – Vincenzo Antinori, *Notizie Istoriche*,
    tr David Wooton

“Natural philosophy as I understand it does not slip away
into sublime and subtle speculations, but is applied effectively
to relieve the inconveniences of the human condition.”
  – Francis Bacon, tr David Wooton

“Egalitarian communities (cities, monasteries and cathedral
chapters...) are governed by the clock, while despotisms are not;
clocks were given prominent, public places in monasteries, cathedrals
and town halls, but they were slower to establish themselves in royal
palaces. (Even now, my university campus, build in the 1960s, is
dominated by a clock tower which is there not to tell time but to
convey the impression that ours is a disciplined, egalitarian
community.)”  – David Wootton, *The Invention of Science*

“Signore Simplicio, give up on that idea and that hope that you have,
that there can be men so much better educated, so much more
sophisticated, and with so much more book-learning than the rest of us
that they can, in defiance of nature, turn falsehood into truth.”
  – Galileo, *Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems*,
    tr David Wooton

“In science progress is a fact, in ethics and politics it is a
superstition.”  – John Gray, *Against Progress and Other Illusions*

“Before Galileo, no competent mathematician had doubted that
Archimedes provided a complete explanation of what ahppens when
bodies float, and no competent Aristotelian philosopher had
disputed the view that shape is critical in determining which
bodies float. And yet Galileo realized...—it must have been an
extraordinary shock—that bodies often float without displacing
their own weight in water. Everybody had been wrong.”
    – David Wootton, *The Invention of Science*

“It is easy to think that new knowledge comes from new types of
apparatus–Galileo’s telescope, Boyle’s air pump, Newton’s
prism—not from new intellectual tools. Often this is a mistaken
view....New instruments are plain as pikestaffs, new intellectual
tools are not.”    – David Wootton, *The Invention of Science*

“Graphs are now ubiquitous, so it comes as something of a shock
to discover that they only began to be put to use in the natural
sciences in the 1830s, and in the social sciences in the 1880s.
The graph represents a powerful new tool for thinking.”
    – David Wootton, *The Invention of Science*

“A false theory can be perfectly reliable when used in the
appropriate context. If you learn to navigate a boat you will be
taught to work with a Ptolemaic system, with a stationary earth and a
moving sun, not because it is true, but because it makes for an easy
set of calculations.”    – David Wootton, *The Invention of Science*

“We have the scientific knowledge we have against all the odds.
There is no evidence that the universe was made with us in mind,
but by good fortune we seem to have the sensory apparatus and the
mental capacities required to make a start on understanding it.”
    – David Wootton, *The Invention of Science*

“It is now become difficult to think our way back into a world
where people did not speak of facts, hypotheses and theories,
where knowledge was not grounded in evidence, where nature did
not have laws. The Scientific Revolution has become almost
invisible simply because it has been so astonishingly successful.”
    – David Wootton, *The Invention of Science*
[I find it intriguing that this was published right before the
phrase “alternative facts” became part of our public discourse.]

“We maneuver our way successfully in intricate social situations
having only a guesswork expectation of the behavior of other persons
around and even less certainly of their expectations of us. Yet, when
these expectations fail we are able to master the great power of humor
and recover gracefully.”    – Judea Pearl, *Heuristics*

“Even the traditional language of the natural sciences cannot claim to
be totally literal, although its key terms often are not recognized to
be metaphors until, in the course of time, the general adoption of a
new analogy yields perspective into the nature of the old.”
 – M H Abrams, *The Mirror and the Lamp*

“I have noticed that even people who claim that everything is
predestined and that we can do nothing to change it look before they
cross the road.”  – Stephen Hawking, “Is Everything Determined?”

“It is too difficult to think up a complete theory of everything all
at one go (though this does not seem to stop some people; I get two or
three unified theories in the mail each week).
  – Stephen Hawking, “Is the End in Sight for Theoretical Physics?”

“At present, computers are a useful aid in research, but they have to
be directed by human minds. If one extrapolates their recent rapid
rate of development, however, it would seem quite possible that they
will take over altogether in theoretical physics. So maybe the end is
in sight for theoretical physicists, if not for theoretical physics.”
  – Stephen Hawking, “Is the End in Sight for Theoretical Physics?”

“For normal speeds of travel the differences between the rates of
clocks are very small. You would have to fly around the world four
hundred million times to add one second to your life; but your life
would be reduced by more than that by all those airline meals.”
  – Stephen Hawking, “Einstein’s Dream”

“During the inflationary period the universe borrowed heavily from its
gravitational energy to finance the create of more matter. The result
was a triumph for Keynesian economics: a vigorous and expanding
universe, filled with material objects. The debt of gravitational
energy will not have to be paid until the end of the universe.”
  – Stephen Hawking, “The Origin of the Universe”

“Aggression would have given a survival advantage in cave sweller days
and earlier and so would have been favored by natural selection....DNA
changes by biological evolution only on a time scale of millions of
years, but our powers of destruction are increasing on a time scale
for the evolution of information, which is now only twenty or thirty
years. Unless we can use our intelligence to control our aggression,
there is not much chance for the human race.”
  – Stephen Hawking, “Is Everything Determined?”

“Recent prophets of doom have [set] definite dates for the end of the
world. These have even tended to depress the stock market, though it
meats me why the end of the world should make one want to sell shares
for money. Presumably, you can’t take either with you.”
  – Stephen Hawking, “The Future of the Universe”

“The Chronology Protection Hypothesis is supported by some recent
calculations that I and other people have done. But the best evidence
we have that time travel is not possible, and never will be, is that
we have not been invaded by hordes of tourists from the future.”
  – Stephen Hawking, “The Future of the Universe”

“It is truly a stochastic parrot, and Google has some serious work
to do.”   – Christian Lebiere, personal communication, 13 March 2024

“Battles are the technical fireworks of the historic drama; behind
them are the loves and hates of men and women, the toil and gambles of
economic life, the defeats and triumphs of science, literature, and
art, the desperate longings of religious faith.”
     – Will and Ariel Durant, *The Age of Napoleon*

"The State must increasingly and earnestly concern itself with the
care of the sick and the aged, and above all, of the children.... I do
not want to see impaired the vigor of competition, but we can do much
to mitigate the consequences of failure.... We want to have free
competition upwards; we decline to allow free competition downwards.
We do not want to pull down the structure of science and
civilizations; but to spread a net over the abyss."
  – Winston Churchill, *Never Give In!*

"[The function of the scientist is] 'to find the point of view from
which the subject appears in its greatest simplicity.'"
  – Josiah Willard Gibbs,
    quoted in Muriel Rukeyser, *Willard Gibbs: American Genius*

"Ideal suppositions are unavoidable in any science. The physicist has
never fully explained a single fact in the universe. He approximates
only. The economist cannot hope to do better."
  – Irving Fisher, *Mathematical Investigations in the Theory of
                    Value and Prices*

"Causation itself may live more in psychology than in physics.
There is no experiment that can definitively prove the presence
of causality; it is entirely immeasurable."
  – Max Bennett, *A Brief History of Intelligence*

”If it weren’t for electricity we’d all be watching television by
candlelight.”  – George Gobel, from a 1954 television special
                 commemorating the 75th birthday of the
                 incandescent light bulb

"Of course, nematodes don't go through artistic blue periods the
way Picasso did."  – Max Bennett, *A Brief History of Intelligence*

"Evolutionary constraints pass a long shadow on modern humanity."
      – Max Bennett, *A Brief History of Intelligence*

"The original function of the neocortex was surely not as broad as its
modern applications—it wasn't for pondering the nature of existence,
planning careers, or writing poetry."
      – Max Bennett, *A Brief History of Intelligence*

"Thinking itself was born not within the clay creatures of
Prometheus's divine workshop, but instead in the small underground
tunnels and knotted trees of a Jurassic Earth, birthed from the
crucible of a hundred million years of dinosaure predation and our
ancestor's desperate attempt to avoid fading into extinction."
      – Max Bennett, *A Brief History of Intelligence*

"The ability to infer the intent of others enabled early primates to
filter out extraneous behaviors and focus only on the relevant
ones.... This created a new degree of transmissibility: skills
that...would once have faded...could now propagate throughout a group
and be passed down endlessly through generations. This is why primates
use hammers and rats do not."
      – Max Bennett, *A Brief History of Intelligence*

"We have only sparse archaeological clues [for the reasons for the
sudden growth in hominin brain size about 2.5 Ma].... Our
understanding of the timeline of events changes with each new
archaeological finding. The earliest known evidence of X is only the
earliest until a new ambitious paleoanthropologist uncovers an even
earlier example." – Max Bennett, *A Brief History of Intelligence*

"A *Homo erectus* without a stone hand ax was as doomed as a lion born
without teeth."    – Max Bennett, *A Brief History of Intelligence*

"Herein lies both the tragedy and beauty of humanity. We are indeed
some of the most altruistic animals, but we may have paid the price
for this altruism with our darker side: our instinct to punish those
who we deem to be moral violators; our reflexive delineation of people
into good and evil; our desperation to conform to our in-group and the
ease with which we demonize those in the out-group."
      – Max Bennett, *A Brief History of Intelligence*

"Person: Are there any animals with three legs?
GPT-3: No, there are no animals with three legs.
Person: Why don't animals have three legs?
GPT-3: Animals don't have three legs because they would fall over."
  – quoted by Max Bennett in *A Brief History of Intelligence*
[*cf.* "All dogs are three legged; it's just that most of them
carry a spare." – Veterinarian Marina Siegert, personal communication,
commenting on how well dogs that have lost a leg continue to function]

"Once predation became a thing, evolution went into overdrive:
those organisms that didn't adapt were lunch—literally."
  – Arik Kershenbaum, *The Zoologist's Guide to the Galaxy*

"It is likely that no animal or alien can evolve a sophisticated
mathematical ability unless it first acquires a basic numerical
ability. Our own prodigious capabilities in algebra, calculus and
statistics may only be possible because our ancestors could tell the
difference between facing down two lions and facing down five."
  – Arik Kershenbaum, *The Zoologist's Guide to the Galaxy*

"The same psychological techniques that you uses to teach your
dog to sit can be used to teach a chicken to skateboard."
  – Arik Kershenbaum, *The Zoologist's Guide to the Galaxy*

"If sociality has so many advantages, why do only some animals
on Earth show feats of spectacular sociality: endless wildebeest
herds, complex termite nests, New York, and so on?"
  – Arik Kershenbaum, *The Zoologist's Guide to the Galaxy*

"We are apt to think that, as deception is so common and widespread
in humans (not just in human politicians), it is a uniquely human
characteristic....Both truth and deceit are...amply present in the
animal world."
  – Arik Kershenbaum, *The Zoologist's Guide to the Galaxy*

"One of the things about science is that sometimes you
just have to do the experiment to convince yourself that
the experiment was pointless."
   – Arik Kershenbaum, *The Zoologist's Guide to the Galaxy*

"Mark is like Schrödinger's cat: you can never tell
whether he's working or not."
   – Christian Lebiere, personal communication, 4 June 2025

"Many critics, especially vociferous ones learned in philosophy
as I have discovered, prefer to read a book by title only."
  – Richard Dawkins, introduction to the 30th anniversary edition
    of *The Selfish Gene*

"Presumably there is indeed no purpose in the ultimate fate of the
cosmos, but do any of us really tie our life's hopes to the ultimate
fate of the cosmos anyway? Of course we don't; not if we are sane. Our
lives are ruled by all sorts of closer, warmer, human ambitions and
perceptions. To accuse science of robbing life of the warmth that
makes it worth living is so preposterously mistaken, so diametrically
opposite to my own feelings and those of most working scientists, I am
almost driven to the despair of which I am wrongly suspected."
  – Richard Dawkins, quoting himself in the introduction to the
    30th anniversary edition of *The Selfish Gene*

"[If] deceit is fundamental in animal communication, then there must
be strong selection to spot deception, and this ought, in turn, to
select for a degree of self-deception — by the subtle signs of
self-knowledge — the deception being practiced."
  – Robert Trivers, forward to Richard Dawkins *The Selfish Gene*

"[The expert reader's] favourite phrases are `with the
exception of'; `but on the other hand'; and `ugh'.
     – Richard Dawkins, preface to *The Selfish Gene*

"Intelligent life on a planet comes of age when it first works out the
reason for its own existence. If superior creatures from space ever
visit earth, the first question they will ask, in order to assess the
level of our civilization, is: `Have they discovered evolution yet?'"
   – Richard Dawkins, *The Selfish Gene*

“No hominid ancestor ever left more descendents because
he could play chess.”     – John Maynard Smith and Eörs Szathamáry,
                                 *The Major Transitions in Evolution*

a death language szathamáry maynard-smith
"The only insteresting non-selectionist alternative would be that
language is an unmodified spandrel—a perfect preadaptation. No serious
theory has been built along these lines. Non-selectionist explanations
of this kind only work if you want to use something complex for
something simpler. You could use a dead computer as a paperweight or
an aquarium, but an ordinary paperweight or aquarium could ever be
used as a computer.”    – John Maynard Smith and Eörs Szathamáry,
                                 *The Major Transitions in Evolution*

a szathamáry maynard-smith
“[For example] European vistors to the USA, confronted by such phrases
as *there you go* or *full of shit*, learn their meanings by
discovering how they are used and, equally important, by using them
experimentally, and judging from the respons whether the usage is
correct.”   – John Maynard Smith and Eörs Szathamáry,
                                 *The Major Transitions in Evolution*

a szathamáry maynard-smith
“Language does not fossilize.”
        – John Maynard Smith and Eörs Szathamáry,
                    *The Major Transitions in Evolution*

a science szathamáry maynard-smith
“The invention of writing made possible the emergence of modern,
large-scale societies, and the change from societies dominated by
magic and ritual to those in which science and reason play an
increasing role. We are today in the midst of yet another major
transition, to a society in which information is stored and
transmitted electrnically.”
        – John Maynard Smith and Eörs Szathamáry,
                    *The Major Transitions in Evolution*

a szathamáry maynard-smith
The East African Vervet monkey has three alarm calls, one for pythons,
one for martial eagles and one for leopards.... Humans use words such
as ‘unicorn‘ and ’golden mountain’ to refer to objects that do not
exist in the world.... No animal would have an alarm call for a
unicorn.”
         – John Maynard Smith and Eörs Szathamáry,
                    *The Major Transitions in Evolution*

"Nobody has yet invented the mathematics for describing the total
structure and behaviour of such an object as a physicist, or even
one of his cells."      – Richard Dawkins, *The Blind Watchmaker*

"If you read trendy intellectual magazines, you may have noticed that
`reductionism` is one of those things, like sin, that is only
mentioned by people who are against it. To call oneself a reductionist
will sound, in some circles, a bit like admitting to eating babies."
      – Richard Dawkins, *The Blind Watchmaker*

"On my wanderings through the backwaters of [the computer simulation]
Biomorph Land, I have encountered fairy shrimp, Aztec temples, Gothic
church windows, aboriginal drawings of kangaroos, and, on one
memorable but unrecapturable occasion, a passable caricature of the
Wykeham Professor of Logic."
      – Richard Dawkins, *The Blind Watchmaker*

"The actual animals that have ever lived on Earth are a tiny subset of
the theoretical animals that *could* exist. These real animals are the
products of a very small number of evolutionary trajectories through
genetic space.... Sitting somewhere in the huge mathematical space are
humans and hyenas, amoebas and aardvarks, flatworms and squids, dodos
and dinosaurs."           – Richard Dawkins, *The Blind Watchmaker*


"The ability to reduce everything to simple fundamental laws does not
imply the ability to start from those laws and reconstruct the universe"
    – P. W. Anderson, "More Is Different", *Science*, 4 August 1972

"The more the elementary particle physicists tell us about
the nature of the fundamental laws the less relevance they
seem to have to the very real problems of the rest of science,
much less to those of society."
    – P. W. Anderson, "More Is Different", *Science*, 4 August 1972

"The macOS Command-Tab application switcher can sometimes appear
on the wrong screen, especially when using multiple displays."
   – Google Gemini (26 June 2025)

"Direct levitation is the hardest of the practical magics, because of
the ever-present danger of the well-known principles of action and
reaction, which means that a wizard attempting to lift a heavy item by
mind power alone faces the prospect of ending up with his brains in
his boots."      – Terry Pratchett, *Equal Rites*

"The cold waters of the details of implementation [of the simulation
of cognition]."
  – Christian Lebiere, personal communication to Mark Orr, June 2025,
    as reported by the latter 7 July 2025

"I am the Yogi Berra of cognitive science."
   – Christian Lebiere, personal communication [referring to his
     utterances and not his catching, hitting or World Series
     record]

"Maybe [thylacines] weere pests to humans, but humans were much
bigger pests to them; now there are no thylacines left and a
considerable surplus of humans."
         – Richard Dawkins, *The Blind Watchmaker*

"Popular bookshops classify their books into major sections that
reflect popular demand. Instead of science, history, literature,
geography and so on, their major departments are gardening, cookery,
`TV titles`, the occult, and I once saw a shelf prominently labelled
`RELIGION AND UFOs`.      – Richard Dawkins, *The Blind Watchmaker*

dawkins librarians categories taxonomy filing museum museums
Whatever categories one adopts for a filing system, there are always
awkward items that don't fit, and uncomfortable indecision leads me, I
am sorry to say, to leave odd papers out on the table, sometimes for
years at a time until it is safe to throw them away.... I sometimes
wonder whether librarians, and keepers of musuems...are particulalry
prone to ulcers."      – Richard Dawkins, *The Blind Watchmaker*

"**anthropocognomorphization* (n) – the attribution of human cognition
to things that are not human cognition"
    – Kevin Gluck, *ACT-R Workshop*, Columbus, Ohio, 29 July 2025

"There have been times in the history of science when the whole of
orthodox science has been rightly thrown over because of a single
awkward fact."      – Richard Dawkins, *The Blind Watchmaker*

"For a plesiosaur in Loch Ness, I would accept the evidence of my own
eyes. If I saw a man levitating himself, before rejecting the whole of
physics I would suspect that I was the victim of a hallucination or a
conjuring trick."      – Richard Dawkins, *The Blind Watchmaker*

"The essence of life is statistical improbability on a colossal scale."
      – Richard Dawkins, *The Blind Watchmaker*

"What lies at the heart of every living thing is not a fre, not warm
breath, not a spark of life. It is information, words, instructions."
      – Richard Dawkins, *The Blind Watchmaker*

"If you want to understand life, don't think about vibrant,
throbbing gels and oozes, think about information technology."
      – Richard Dawkins, *The Blind Watchmaker*

"One of the firmest tenets...in the later teachings of Dr Trelawney
was that coincidence was no more than `magic in action'.
      – Anthony Powell, *A Dance to the Music of Time*

"Pseudoscience is afraid of one particular type of
people who are very hard to fool: stage magicians."
   – Liu Cixin, *The Three-Body Problem*, tr Ken Liu

‘It is amazing to think that in the year 2020 Biden could actually run
for president with an ad that says: “I believe in the Enlightenment,
Newtonian physics and the Age of Reason. The other guy doesn’t.’
            – Thomas Friedman, the *New York Times*, 30 July 2020

"I could not imagine being an atheist at any time before 1859."
     – Richard Dawkins, *The Blind Watchmaker*

“One thing about DARPA is its better than working for the Mob.”
   – Christian Lebiere, November 2023, as related by Mark Orr

“[Einstein’s] feelings about [quantum mechanics] are summed up in the
phrase “God does not play dice.” But all the evidence indicates that
God is an inveterate gambler and that He throws the dice on every
possible occasion.”  – Stephen Hawking, “Einstein’s Dream”

“Draft animals can deliver 500 to 700 watts of power,
while humans, at best, can deliver about 75 watts.”
     – David Christian, *Maps of Time*

“Computers were invented as super drones to do tasks no human in her
or his right mind (much less left brain) would have the patience, or
the perseverance, to manage.... Now our robot drones, the ones
designed to take all the boring jobs, become the instrument for
libidinal extravaganzas devoid of any socially productive component.
Video games are computers neutered of purpose, liberated from
functionality.”    – Charles Bernstein, “Play It Again, Pac-Man,”
                     *Postmodern Culture*, September 1991

“You are not a horse. You are not a cow. Seriously, y'all. Stop
it….Using the drug ivermectin to treat COVID-19 it can be dangerous
and even lethal.”     – US FDA, *Twitter*, 21 August 2021

‘When He supposedly said, “Let there be light!” perhaps He actually
said, “Let there be an SU(5) Yang-Mills theory with all its gauge
bosons, let the symmetry be broken down spontaneously, and let all but
one of the remaining massless gauge bosons be sold into infrared
slavery. That one last gauge boson is my favorite. Let him rush forth
to illumnate all of my creations!”’    – A Zee, *Fearful Symmetry*

“The new technologies have shortened our attention spans, heightened
our anxieties, made us more prone to depression and more in need of
outside validation, left us less capable of patient reflection, and
also less interested in seeking out different points of view. It’s no
accident that Trump’s favorite outlet was Twitter: The medium is
perfect for people who think in spasms, speak in grunts, emote with
insults and salute with hashtags.”
      – Bret Stephens, the *New York Times*, 20 September 2021

“The [evolutionary] relationship between certainty of paternity and
male parental care remains an area of active research, enlivened by
controversy.”    – Neil A Campbell, Jane B Reece, et al., *Biology*

feynman string-theory physics
“String theorists don’t make predictions, they make excuses.”
    – attributed to Richard Feynman

“I’ve no idea how to make a rational analysis of Twitter.”
    – Mark Orr, personal communication

“Consider, for instance, an individual *E. coli* cell living
in the erratic environment of a human colon, dependent for
its nutrients on the whimsical eating habits of its host.”
          – Neil A Campbell, Jane B Reece, et al., *Biology*

“Humans, of course, were not created in a state of Original Reason. We
descended from apes, spent hundreds of millennia in small bands, and
evolved our cognitive processes in the service of hunting, gathering,
and socializing. Only gradually, with the appearance of literacy,
cities, and long-distance travel and communication, could our
ancestors cultivate the faculty of reason and apply it to a broader
range of concerns, a process that is still ongoing.”
       – Steven Pinker, *The Better Angels of Our Nature*

“There’s a reason ‘I.T.’ is a four letter word.”

“You know what uranium is, right? This thing called nuclear weapons
like lots of things are done with uranium including some bad things.”
    – Donald Trump, White House Press Briefing, 16 February 2017

“The process of living, like all other processes, raises the total
amount of entroy in the universe, destroying order and structure.
Ever compare a five-course meal with the ensuing excrement?”
          – Robert Wright, *Nonzero*

“[E. O.] Wilson, the world’s expert on ants, may have had
the last laugh in his verdict on Marxism: ‘Wonderful theory.
Wrong species.’”      – Steven Pinker, *The Blank Slate*

“All that stuff I was taught about evolution, embryology, Big Bang
theory, all that is lies straight from the pit of hell...I believe
that the Earth is about 9,000 years old. I believe that it was created
in six days as we know them.”
    – Rep Paul Broun, physician and member of the House Committee
       on Science, Space and Technology, speech to Liberty Baptist
       Church, 27 September 2012

